[Music]
let's
physics the hell out of this
all right so i'll admit that as we sit
here it is
a bit difficult for us to wrap our heads
around the fact that the earth is
actually rotating
at a thousand miles an hour we don't
feel that we feel
stationary and it appears as if the sun
and all the stars in the sky are the
ones moving and
not us but the thing is we're all moving
with earth from the day we were born up
until right now
all we've ever known is an earth that
rotates at roughly a thousand miles
an hour it's never changed
its speed and it's only when the speed
changes do you actually feel movement
think about when you go driving in a car
for example
on a motorway cruise control on 70 miles
an hour
you don't notice that you're moving you
feel stationary
sat in the seat in the car it's only
when you
change your speed i.e you accelerate
we slam on the brakes that you all of a
sudden become
aware of the fact that you were moving
this is one of the most fundamental
laws of physics if you're moving at a
constant speed
you're not aware of that movement anyone
who's been skydiving will recognize this
after you've jumped out of the plane you
accelerate as you're pulled
down to earth but eventually you reach
your terminal velocity the fastest that
you're going to speed up to and that is
a constant speed if you close your eyes
at that speed you
have no idea that you are actually
falling
and so the same is true for the earth
rotating at a thousand miles an hour or
even orbiting the sun
at 67 000 miles an hour
we're not aware of that speed because
we've always been moving at that speed
it's only if the earth's rotation came
to some shuddering hull or started to
speed up that we'd all
suddenly be aware of the fact that we'd
been moving
this entire time now going back to our
car analogy or even our skydiving
analogy as well
one way that you obviously can tell
you're moving is if you open the sunroof
or the window and you stick your head
out and you can feel
the air rushing past so you might wonder
well how come we can't feel the air
rushing past
a thousand miles an hour while the earth
spins
well that's because the atmosphere of
earth actually rotates with the earth as
well it's actually held there by
gravity this is the reason why it takes
the same amount of time to fly east to
west as it does
west to east the plane is still in the
atmosphere which is moving
with the earth as it rotates it's not
like the earth is rotating
underneath the atmosphere as the plane
flies
now i guess you might be thinking well
if we could pop our head out of the
atmosphere then that would be the
equivalent of popping your head out of
the sunroof to
to feel the movement of the car but
space is a vacuum so you wouldn't feel a
thousand mile an hour wind in your hair
because there's no air in space
so there's no wind and so there would be
no molecules to exert any sort of
pressure
on your face as you moved through space
so how do we even know that the earth is
moving then well
just like in a car you don't have to
stick your head out of the window dear
you could just
look out the window and see that the
objects are moving past you and infer
therefore that you
must be moving do the same thing on
earth except the objects that we look at
are the things in the sky
like the sun and the stars there's a
great video from astrophotographer arya
nirenberg
which fixes the positions of the stars
and then shows you the relative movement
of earth to them and so you can
really clearly see how the earth moves
even over just
three hours of time in this time lapse
i could watch this video all day i
i just love how it gives you this
incredible perspective of both
our place on earth but also the true
nature and the scale
of the universe that surrounds us so
even as we sit here feeling
very stationary know that we always
have and always will be moving through
life
at a thousand miles an hour before we
get to the bloopers i just want to thank
this week's video sponsor
brilliant brilliant is a website with
interactive courses on loads of
different areas of science and
math which break down problems into easy
to understand chunks so that you learn
by
doing and they're fun as well if you
like this video then you should check
out their physics of the everyday course
which covers
everything you've ever been curious
about from the physics of sports like
skiing gymnastics and baseball
to the physics of weather patterns and
hurricanes
i've always had a weird fascination with
extreme weather just
i think it's the idea that these initial
conditions that through the laws of
physics create something that's
both chaotic and ordered at the same
time it's
mind-blowing brilliant breaks all that
down
for you so you can understand what's
going on so if that sounds like
something that you would be up for and
you want to support me and my channel
then head over to brilliant.org forward
slash dr becky
that's d-r-b-e-c-k-y and sign up
completely
for free plus the first 200 people that
go to that link will get 20
off an annual premium subscription which
is pretty cool in my book so thanks so
much for brilliant for that
but one more thing before we roll those
bloopers in my previous video
how i use code as an astrophysicist so
many of you asked me the exact same
question which was what music do you
listen to
while you code so i figured the easiest
way was to make a playlist and share it
with you all i've linked it in the
description below it's really the tracks
that get me
really pumped up when i want to really
focus and get some code
written but when i'm doing things like
reading
or writing instead i don't tend to
listen to music instead
i tend to listen to asmr now for those
of you who don't know what that is it
stands for autonomous
sensory meridian response and the
science behind it is really still in its
infancy and we don't really understand
it but essentially what it is
is this oddly relaxing tingling
sensation that some people experience
when exposed to
certain types of sounds like tapping
or whispering now we don't really
understand why a lot of people have this
tingly response but it's thought to
maybe have something to do with the
sounds you heard
as a baby now a lot of people find it
really helps them to fall asleep but for
me it really aids in
concentration it really sort of relaxes
my mind so that i can concentrate
on a specific task like writing or
reading i think because like the tapping
in the whispering maybe reminds me of
like being in a library i guess which i
really missed
like working from home that sort of
oddly hushed
environment it's sort of a way to
recreate that so i wanted to shout out
one of my friends
sarah who has an asmr channel i listen
to her stuff
all the time she's an engineer so a
fellow woman in science
too and she loves the fact that you know
she contributes to astrophysics research
in just a tiny way from the fact that i
listen to her videos to concentrate
while i'm
writing papers or writing telescope
proposals
so go check out her channel i've linked
it in the video description below
and keep an eye out for a video she's
got coming very soon where she's going
to be
listing some space facts that i've sent
to her as well so i know
that you'll all enjoy that one so head
over there and say hi
from me and now we can roll those
bloopers
such a weird noise oh
not really lipstick it's never changed
is that a motorbike what was that was a
plane oh
well the automotive color out there is
really pretty to do
i need to go to walk no distracted sorry
i've looked at the evidence and i
believe
that planet earth turns at a thousand
miles an hour
it stands for autonomous meridian
sensory response
no that's amsr